Chlordiazepoxide

IMPORTANT WARNING:
Morphine may be habit forming. Do not take more or less of it, take it more often, stop taking it suddenly, or take it in a different way than directed by your doctor. Tell your doctor if you or anyone in your family drinks or has ever drunk large amounts of alcohol, uses or has ever used street drugs, or has overused prescription medications, or has had an overdose, or if you have or have ever had depression or another mental illness.

Morphine may cause serious or life-threatening breathing problems, especially during the first 24 to 72 hours of your treatment and any time your dose is increased. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment: slowed breathing, long pauses between breaths, or shortness of breath.

Morphine may harm or cause death to other people who take your medication, especially children. Keep morphine in a safe place so that no one else can take it accidentally or on purpose.

Taking certain other medications, alcohol, or street drugs during your treatment with morphine may increase the risk that you will experience breathing problems or other serious, life-threatening breathing problems, sedation, or coma. Tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medication and will monitor you carefully.

Swallow the morphine extended-release tablets or capsules whole. Do not split, chew, dissolve, or crush them. If you swallow broken, chewed, crushed, or dissolved extended-release tablets or capsules, you may receive too much morphine at once instead of receiving the medication slowly over time. This may cause serious breathing problems, including overdose and death.

Be sure that you know the dose in milliliters that your doctor has prescribed. Use the dosing cup, oral syringe, or dropper provided with your medication to carefully measure the number of milliliters of solution that your doctor prescribed. Ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have any questions about how to measure your dose or how much medication you should take. You may experience serious or life-threatening side effects if you take a different amount of medication than prescribed by your doctor.

Tell your doctor if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant. If you take morphine regularly during your pregnancy, your baby may experience life-threatening withdrawal symptoms after birth.

Your doctor or pharmacist will give you the manufacturer's patient information sheet (Medication Guide) when you begin treatment with morphine and each time you fill your prescription if a Medication Guide is available for the morphine product you are taking. Read the information carefully and ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have any questions. You can also visit the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) website (https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm085729.htm) or the manufacturer's website to obtain the Medication Guide.

Talk to your doctor about the risks of taking morphine.

Why is this medication prescribed?
Morphine is used to relieve severe pain. Morphine is in a class of medications called opiate (narcotic) analgesics. It works by changing the way the brain and nervous system respond to pain.

How should this medicine be used?
Morphine comes as a solution (liquid), an immediate-release tablet, an extended-release (long-acting) tablet, and as an extended-release (long-acting) capsule to take by mouth. Take the oral solution and immediate-release tablets every 4 hours as needed for pain. Take the extended-release tablets every 8 or every 12 hours. Take the extended-release capsules with or without food every 24 hours. Take morphine at the same times every day.

Use the dosing cup or syringe to measure your dose of morphine solution. Ask your pharmacist if you have any question about how much medication you should take or how to use the dosing cup or syringe.

If you are taking extended-release capsules and you have a gastrostomy tube (surgically inserted feeding tube), ask your doctor or pharmacist how to administer the medication through your tube.

If you are unable to swallow the extended-release capsules, carefully open a capsule, sprinkle all of the beads on a spoonful of cold or room temperature applesauce. Swallow the entire mixture immediately without chewing or crushing the beads. Then rinse your mouth with a little water and swallow the water. Do not mix the beads into any other food. Do not save mixtures of medication and applesauce for later.

Your doctor may adjust your dose of morphine during your treatment, depending on how well your pain is controlled and on the side effects that you experience. Talk to your doctor about how you are feeling during your treatment with morphine. Tell your doctor if you feel that your pain is not controlled or if your pain increases, becomes worse, or if you have new pain or an increased sensitivity to pain during your treatment with morphine. Do not take more of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.

Talk to your doctor or pharmacist about access to rescue medicines, naloxone or nalmefene, while taking morphine. Rescue medications can reverse the life-threatening effects of an opioid overdose and are available over the counter or with a prescription. Make sure that you and your family members and people usually around you know how to recognize an overdose, how to use naloxone or nalmefene, and what to do until emergency medical help arrives. Your doctor or pharmacist will show you and others how to use it. If symptoms of an overdose occur, they should give the first dose of naloxone, call 911 immediately, and stay with you and watch you closely until emergency medical help arrives. If your symptoms return, the person should give you another dose of the rescue medication. Additional doses may be given every 2 to 3 minutes, if symptoms return before medical help arrives.

If you have been taking morphine regularly, do not stop taking morphine without talking to your doctor. Your doctor may decrease your dose gradually. If you suddenly stop taking morphine, you may experience withdrawal symptoms such as restlessness; teary eyes; runny nose; yawning; irritability; anxiety; sweating; difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep; chills; back, muscle, or joint pain; nausea; vomiting; loss of appetite; diarrhea; stomach cramps; weakness; fast heartbeat; or fast breathing. Your doctor will probably decrease your dose gradually.

Other uses for this medicine
This medication is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.

What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking morphine,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this drug, any part of this drug, or any other drugs, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
some medications should not be taken with morphine. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting morphine with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking morphine, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are taking the following medications or have stopped taking them within the past two weeks: isocarboxazid, linezolid, methylene blue, phenelzine, selegiline, or tranylcypromine.
the following nonprescription or herbal products may interact with morphine: St. John's wort and tryptophan. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking morphine. Do not start these medications while taking morphine without discussing it with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had slowed breathing, asthma, chronic pulmonary disease (COPD), or other lung problems, a blockage or narrowing of your stomach or intestines, or paralytic ileus (condition in which digested food does not move through the intestines). Your doctor may tell you not to take morphine.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had a head injury, a brain tumor, or any condition that increases pressure in the brain; seizures; or heart, kidney, liver, pancreas, thyroid, or gall bladder disease.
tell your doctor if you are breastfeeding. You should not breastfeed while you are taking morphine.
you should know that this medication may decrease fertility in men and women. Talk to your doctor about the risks of taking morphine.
you should know that this medication may make you drowsy. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this medication affects you.
you should know to not drink alcoholic beverages while you are taking morphine. Alcohol can make the side effects from morphine worse.
you should know that morphine may cause dizziness, lightheadedness, and fainting when you get up too quickly from a lying position. To avoid this problem, get out of bed slowly, resting your feet on the floor for a few minutes before standing up.
you should know that morphine may cause constipation. Talk to your doctor about changing your diet or using other medications to prevent or treat constipation while you are taking morphine.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.

What should I do if I forget a dose?
If you are taking morphine on a regular schedule, take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one. Do not take more than one dose of the extended-release capsules in 24 hours.

What side effects can this medication cause?
Morphine may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms or those in SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS are severe or do not go away:
nausea, vomiting, gas
sweating
headache
decreased sexual desire, inability to get or keep an erection
weakness, tiredness
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of the following symptoms or those in the IMPORTANT WARNING section, call your doctor immediately:
chest pain, changes in heartbeat
agitation, hallucinations (seeing things or hearing voices that do not exist), fever, sweating, confusion, fast heartbeat, shivering, severe muscle stiffness or twitching, loss of coordination, or diarrhea
nausea, vomiting, loss of appetite, weakness, or dizziness
new pain or pain from touch or doing ordinary tasks such as combing your hair
difficulty swallowing, regurgitation (bringing up swallowed food into throat and mouth), pain in the chest area
seizures
extreme drowsiness
hives; rash; itching; swelling of the eyes, face, mouth, lips or throat; hoarseness; difficulty breathing or swallowing
unusual snoring or long pauses during breaths during sleep
Morphine may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while you are taking this medication.

If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).

What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children, and in a location that is not easily accessible by others, including visitors to the home. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).

Store morphine products in a safe place so that no one else can take it accidentally or on purpose. Keep track of how many tablets or solution is left so you will know if any are missing.

Dispose of any medication that is outdated or no longer needed through a medicine take-back program. If you do not have a take-back program nearby or one that you can access promptly, flush any morphine extended-release tablets, extended-release capsules, and liquid that are outdated or no longer needed down the toilet so that others will not take them. Talk to your pharmacist about the proper disposal of your medication.

Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach. https://www.upandaway.org

In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at https://www.poisonhelp.org/help. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.

Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
slow, shallow, or irregular breathing
difficulty breathing
excessive sleepiness
unable to respond or wake up
limp or weak muscles
cold, clammy skin
narrowing or widening of the pupils (dark circle in the eye)
slow heartbeat
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.

Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are taking morphine.

This prescription is not refillable. If you are taking morphine to control your pain on a long-term basis, be sure to schedule appointments with your doctor so that you do not run out of medication. If you are taking morphine on a short-term basis, call your doctor if you continue to experience pain after you finish the medication.

Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.

